---
title: What the heck is DevOps?
layout: default
created_at: 2012-07-15 12:00:00 +00:00
nocomment:  true
---
h2. {{page.title}}

DevOps is a common sense approach to software release cycles. It's an accumulation of best practices and the agreement that software has no business value until it's in the hands of its intended user. The best way to do that is ruthless automation to the point where deployments become as simple as pressing a button. Does it require effort to build and maintain? You bet ya but, it can save many a night of restless sleep and marathon weekend deployments.

The name DevOps is attributed to an awesome Belgian by the name of "Patrick DeBois":http://www.jedi.be/blog/2010/02/12/what-is-this-devops-thing-anyway/. Story goes it's derived from the curious union of development practices being applied to operations. It is commonly described as a "bridge of communication" between developers and operations. Criticise if you will, but when we have our head in code and configuration sometimes we don't take into account the bigger picture. Ultimately that's what it's all about increased communication across functions and heavy automation. 

Common tools of the trade include: 

* provisioning: Cobbler, Kickstart, VeeWee
* virtualization: XEN, VMWare, VirtualBox, LXC
* configuration management: Puppet, Chef, Ansible, CFEngine
* CI: TeamCity, Jenkins, Bamboo
* Command & Control: Go, Fabric, mCollective, misc Doodleware which shall remain unnamed
* dirty hands and scripts.

Jez Humbles book "Continuous Delivery":http://www.continuousdelivery.com/ has a good overview of some of the important points when delivering a project.  It can be summarised as; automate almost everything, don't use bandaids and deal with the pain instead of ignoring it.  My personal addition would be, consider getting rid of that crappy overpriced "enterprise" middleware that's like an albatross around your neck. There's plenty of alternatives out there and big iron isn't necessary for all that much these days.
