---
title:      Watch for Flying Bitmaps
created_at: 2008-08-26 12:00:00 +00:00
layout:     default
---
h2. {{page.title}}

Zee goal for today is to use ActionScript 3's BitmapData to slice and dice a bitmap like a fine piece of sashimi.  A few applications include;

* client-side image croppers.
* runtime cropping of linked and external photos for panel backgrounds.

What I will illustrate here is just a simple sliding door effect.  As seen in the SWF below. The items of greatest interest today include;

* flash.display.Bitmap
* flash.display.BitmapData
* flash.geom.Point
* flash.geom.Rectangle
Otay so lets layout what we need and what we generally want to do.

h3. Halves Too #Include

* JPG or PNG that we want to slice up.
* Flash compiler (Flex SDK/Flash 9/etc).

h3. Blueprints, get your blueprints here!!

We are planning a sliding door effect that does not use a mask, where do we start? Well like all things even vaguely cool we require a little math. First lets create an additional 99 frames on our root timeline. Next drag your photo into the Library and create a linkage with a class name of *TestPhoto*. Done? Good now that we've made some room and set the table lets eat!

h3. What size slice of pizza would you like with your BitmapData?

For this test I decided the number of frames works well to decide my slice size. Each frame is equal to a 1% increment reveal of the bitmap because of those extra 99 frames we added earlier.

@var percentage:int = currentFrame / totalFrames;@


h3. I'm full what next?

Remember those extra 99 frames I asked you to add? Well they come in handy when used in conjunction with a frame listener. Below you will find only what is required for the dynamic slice using the current frame to calculate the percentage of image to reveal.

<pre>
var slice_width:int = percentage * bitmap_width; 
var slice_data:BitmapData = new BitmapData( slice_width, source_bitmap.height );

// left edge is stationary
var crop_region:Rectangle = new Rectangle( 0, 0, slide_width, source_bitmap.height );
var destination_point:Point = new Point( 0, 0 );

// here's where the magic happens
slice_data.copyPixels( source_bitmap, crop_region, destination_point );
var slice_bitmap:Bitmap = new Bitmap( slice_data );

addChild( slice_bitmap );
</pre>

h3. Would you like a mint sir?

Okay at some point you're going to be full to the brim, or at least providing a full reveal of your image. What if you want to downsize? As "Mr. Saul":http://www.johnralstonsaul.com/SUM_Unconscious.html might argue, downsizing often has a detrimental effect. While I agree, I'm not here to argue corporate politics. The best way to deal with this conundrum is to clean up after yourself.

@if( numChildren > 1 ) removeChildAt( 0 );@

h3. Cheque please!

Lets wrap this all up in a class for take-out.

<pre>
/**
 * Written by: Nathan Fisher
 * License: Do with this what you want just don't blame me if it blows up. 
 * 
 * For the simple test use this as your root document class.
 */
package {
 // photo linkage class name
 import SourceBitmap;

 import flash.display.Bitmap;
 import flash.display.BitmapData;
 import flash.display.MovieClip;
 import flash.display.Sprite;

 import flash.events.Event;

 import flash.geom.Point;
 import flash.geom.Rectangle;

 public class SlidingDoor extends MovieClip {
  public static const PHOTO_WIDTH:int = 720;
  public static const PHOTO_HEIGHT:int = 478;
  public static const DESTINATION_POINT:Point = new Point( 0, 0 );

  private var source_data:BitmapData;
  private var slice_container:Sprite;
  private var bitmap_width:int;


  /** SlidingDoor: Constructs a sliding door effect using the specified BitmapData.
   *
   */
  public function SlidingDoor( theSourceData:BitmapData = null )
  {
   if( theSourceData == null ) theSourceData = new TestPhoto( PHOTO_WIDTH, PHOTO_HEIGHT );
   source_data = theSourceData;
   bitmap_width = theSourceData.width;

   slice_container = new Sprite( );
   addChild( slice_container );
   addEventListener( Event.ENTER_FRAME, frameListener );
  }


  /** frameListener: Each passing frame represents a percentage of the photo to reveal.
   *
   */
  public function frameListener( e:Event ):void
  {
   var slice_width:int = percentage * bitmap_width; 
   var slice_data:BitmapData = new BitmapData( slice_width, source_bitmap.height );

   // left edge is stationary
   var crop_region:Rectangle = new Rectangle( 0, 0, slide_width, source_bitmap.height );
   var destination_point:Point = new Point( 0, 0 );

   // here's where the magic happens
   slice_data.copyPixels( source_bitmap, crop_region, destination_point );
   var slice_bitmap:Bitmap = new Bitmap( slice_data );

   // what good is art if no one see's it? Add to the slice_container so it is visible.
   slice_container.addChild( slice_bitmap );
   // remove previous slices if applicable.
   if( slice_container.numChildren > 1 ) slice_container.removeChildAt( 0 );
  }
 }
}
</pre>

In the example above I assumed the bitmap slice is the only element in it's parent container. As illustrated in the full class definition I suggest creating an empty MovieClip or Sprite that is reserved for such a purpose.

h3. Flash to 2 minutes later in the lavatory... OUTPUT!

<object type="application/x-shockwave-flash" data="/images/phototest.swf" width="550" height="400">
<param name="movie" value="/images/phototest.swf" />
</object>

h3. Notes & Other Weirdness

The class can be refined much further including a setter for the bitmap data. Like all things in life there is always room for improvement.

The included photo was provided by "Tessier Pools":http://www.tessierpools.com/ and is a "Skip Phillips":http://www.questarpools.com/ design.

