---
title:      Dance and Pivot SQL Style
created_at: 2010-08-01 12:00:00 +00:00
layout:     default
---
Found myself looking at Open Flash Charts for a reporting system.  I wanted to create page views broken down by day.  A simplified schema is as follows:

| id | created_at | page |
| Integer | DateTime | Varchar(255) |

I wanted to create a table like the following:

| page | monday | tuesday | wednesday | thursday | friday | saturday | sunday |
| index | 3 | 5 | 2 | 8 | 9 | 30 | 32 |
| contact | 2 | 1 | 4 | 3 | 7 | 12 | 16 |\nMy first though was just do a simple GROUP BY and pivot the table through code.

<pre>
SELECT page, DATE(created_at), COUNT(*) AS hits 
FROM page_views
GROUP BY DATE(created_at), page ORDER BY page;
</pre>

I figured I could alternatively use temp tables but, I had an itch to find out if there was another way using pure SQL and no temp tables.  During my search I ran across all sorts of queries some obscure head scratchers.  After much frustration I started reading the MySQL for any reprieve particularly the section on "functions and operators":http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.1/en/functions.html.  After a small meal and some strange query results I ran into a presentation created by "Giuseppe Maxia":http://datacharmer.org/ aka the "Data Charmer".  I reamed through his presentation and found what I was looking for in the form of a 2 query crosstab.  I reformulated his query to suit my needs and came up with the following:

<pre>
SELECT page_name AS name,
COUNT(CASE WHEN DATE(created_at) = '?' THEN id ELSE null END) AS mon,
COUNT(CASE WHEN DATE(created_at) = '?' THEN id ELSE null END) AS tues,
COUNT(CASE WHEN DATE(created_at) = '?' THEN id ELSE null END) AS wed,
COUNT(CASE WHEN DATE(created_at) = '?' THEN id ELSE null END) AS thurs,
COUNT(CASE WHEN DATE(created_at) = '?' THEN id ELSE null END) AS fri,
COUNT(CASE WHEN DATE(created_at) = '?' THEN id ELSE null END) AS sat,
COUNT(CASE WHEN DATE(created_at) = '?' THEN id ELSE null END) AS sun,
COUNT(CASE WHEN DATE(created_at) 
  IN ('?','?','?','?','?','?','?')
  THEN id ELSE null END) AS total
FROM page_views GROUP BY name
</pre>

What are your thoughts? Any similar implementations how did you handle it?

