---
title:      Manchester Geek Night - DevOps Applied
created_at: 2012-11-14 12:00:00 +00:00
layout:     default
---

h3. A 3 step technical redux

Apologies folks started a new job and have really been dragging my feet on this. Hope to add more on my train rides home.

h3. Build

h4. Code

Build Info Page
* created at
* build number
* SCM revision
* requested at (helps identify caching proxies)

Health Check Pages
* No passwords or connection strings
* No passwords or connection strings
* No passwords or connection strings, I've said it 3 times don't make me say it again!
* You may want *short* caching here to prevent DoSing constrained services, but generally should report on any dependencies (e.g. key value stores, db's, etc).
* Consider using a microformat or expose it as JSON as well as a page.

* Puppet (DSL) - my preference
* Chef (Ruby)
* Pallet (Clojure)
* cfEngine (DSL)
* Ansible (Python)

h4. Test

* puppet parse (e.g. find puppet -name \*.pp | xargs -n100 puppet parser validate)
* puppet-lint (Ruby Gem)
* erb syntax check
* Vagrant

h4. Package

* simple compressed file (zip, tarball)
* structured compressed file w/ metadata (jar, war, etc)
* system package (dpkg, rpm, dmg, etc)
* generate build info at this stage (revision, creation date, build number)

h4. Publish

* web-dav
* maven repository
* file share

h3. Deploy

h4. Push/Pull Package

* scp
* file system mount
* torrent

h4. Backup/Migrate

* Highly dependent on your data store and size.
* NoSQL doesn't mean "No migrations", it may feel that way but, you'll just accumulate debt in your code.

h4. Install

* Start with one node to verify it will even work.
* Only install to a subset of nodes.  Pick a number that you're confident when pulled that the rest of your nodes can handle peak traffic.

h4. Verify

* build info matches expected (e.g. did the deployment work as expected?)
* health check page.
* critical user flows (exercise connectivity to dependencies, everything else should've been caught in upstream tests)

h3. Monitor

h4. Collect

* collectd
* graphite
* ganglia

h4. Analyse

h4. Readjust

h3. Presentation Resources

* "Live Stream Recording":https://new.livestream.com/accounts/1960766/events/1673605
* "Slide Deck":/media/pres/2012-11-14-DevopsApplied.pdf

Updated:
* 2013-01-10 - Add bullet points for Build and Deploy.
* 2013-01-09 - carve out the general sections.
